Alice Hoffman. You know you and I did do an interview before. That's right. You don't remember but it was I think it was important but it was a really long time ago. I don't remember anything. It was illumination night. Yeah and that was a pretty significant book for you wasn't it? I guess that was the first book that you wrote after you had had children is that right? Yeah. Did you find that that
affected the course of your creative reviews?
Completely.
I mean, first of all, it made me write much more quickly than I had written before, you know, just in terms of speed, portioning the day, you know, and having to, you know, fit writing in instead of fit your life around writing.
It was kind of the reverse, you know.
Well, the discipline, but how about in terms of content?
Completely changed it.
I feel like I crossed over to some line and, you know, went to the other side.
I went from
the child's kind of point of view to the parents point of view.
I feel like I totally crossed over.
But children still remain very much.
Yeah, I do write about children a lot, but I still feel like my allegiance changed.
From what to what?
From thinking of
myself as a writer and a person as a child to thinking of myself as a writer and a person as a parent.
How about in terms of creating characters?
I really do believe that for me, because I had difficulty in being a parent, it didn't come very easy for me.
It gave me a lot more sympathy and a lot more insight into certain characters.
in life and in fiction both.
I'm not asking you to explain that, but I would say ambiguous when you say it was difficult for you in terms of having children or raising them or what?
I don't know how do you explain it?
Well, just raising them, I just think it's a tremendously difficult thing to do when you make mistakes.
As a child, just think things are black and white.
My parents did this.
This is a mistake.
I just saw the other side.
I saw how you try to do things and fail.
Even with the best intentions,
In your art, do you find now that it's easier or harder to characterize children?
I felt like a child for so long.
I think it's kind of my generation.
It's a long time to grow up so that I feel like I have what it is to be a child down.
What it is to be a parent.
That was what I didn't know.
If you don't mind, we'll jump around the block.
Yeah, sure.
That's good.
But magic really fascinates me.
Yeah.
My favorite Shakespeare play is The Tempest.
Uh-huh.
Crossbowl is my favorite character, you know, the magician.
I write about him in my book.
Huh.
He's Shakespeare, so I don't think that's... And, of course, one of the concepts... He was Shakespeare's really... He was the character that Shakespeare used to say goodbye to the stage, and he was a magician.
who took books with him off to the island, books and his daughter, that was it, and his one, which at the end he buries his books and his one.
The distinction between good magic and bad magic, I guess, is what I'm driving on.
And I wonder if you feel similarly.
Is there black magic and white magic?
Are there good magicians and bad magicians?
Well, I guess I'm going to, I certainly believe that there's good and evil, but I think, you know, for me,
Oh, thanks.
It is a bird bath, isn't it?
Yeah, it's good.
Stop my line.
Steinbeck used that.
Do you want to order?
Yeah, I think we should.
Okay.
Our soup today is fiery chicken chili.
We've got you today is a grilled brown with a roasted red pepper chicken, please, and again.
Comes with rice and basil, 25, and boxes of black chicken gennichini with a saffron cream sauce.
It has grilled chicken and a little squash.
You know what, I think, just what you were saying, you know, I think good magic is books.
It's mostly books.
I mean, that's what, for me personally, that was the total magic of, you know, being able to escape.
Yeah, I mean, that's what it is, you know.
And I feel like, you know, the first stories that I liked were fairy tales, you know, but the whole experience of reading.
and escaping into a book and, like, reaching a different universe, you know, an alternative universe, you know.
I mean, that to me was the initial magic that, for me personally, rescued me from my, you know, life.
This is prior to you becoming a writer?
Yeah, you know, yeah, yeah.
Why is it...
How is it that you use this subject so often in your writing, the variations of it, this magical sensibility of each other?
Yes.
You know, the thing is, I really don't see it as kind of like magical realism.
I see it as realism.
But a lot of the reviewers are saying this, haven't they?
Yeah, well, you know, I think literature is magic, you know.
It, you know, it's, it's, I think that's sort of a, you know, it's not real.
It's what it's on the paper.
It's doing some kind of conjuring anyway.
It's Shakespeare, you know.
I mean, the poet, the madman and the lover, et cetera, are all the same.
And the poet is like a magician who pulls
I can't do the quote, but it's the great quote on the creative process.
He compares the metaphor as a magician.
Right, and that's what it really, I feel like it is, like to create like Heathcliff or something.
That's not magic.
Yeah, you love Heathcliff.
Yeah, I do.
I see you mentioned him constantly.
Yeah.
Well, I just feel like what an alive, how much more alive than any person, you know?
Um so anyway that's I don't think it is like a magical realism. I think that's that's an arbitrary kind of. It's a category that's useful for reviewers I guess. I guess so but I think it's very narrow and I think it's you know in a way kind of silly. Um this is it's interesting that I remember after elimination night and I came to your house
I was astonished.
I think I sensed it, having read that book, that there were a lot of the qualities, this fear, the phobias.
Are you still afflicted with any of these phobias?
Well, I think writers and people who are phobic are really similar in that their main mode of operation is what if.
You know, for a writer, that's what you're thinking about.
That's the way you operate.
You know, what if this character walked into a room and met this other character?
And, you know, as somebody who has phobias, you know, it's like, what if I walk down the street and a plane crashes right here on the, you know, mass app or whatever?
So I think there's a certain kind of imagination that's pretty similar, really.
So...
But you seem to be getting out a lot more now, or is that?
I think I always have, you know.
I think it's more, you know, people who are critical of themselves tend to be more aware of everything they can't do, you know.
I have to believe, I have two daughters age, one that will be 14 in a couple of weeks.
Oh.
So a little older than yours, I guess.
But I think when you have these kids, it doesn't get easier.
It just gets harder.
It's just this anxiety about everything.
Yeah.
Illness, disease, safety.
Right.
Those are all the things.
Am I doing the best that I can to make them good people?
Right.
Yeah.
I mean, I could do time as well.
That's completely.
That's exactly it.
I mean, the enjoyment, the satisfaction of having them is one thing.
I mean, it validates your life in so many ways.
But on the other hand, the anxiety that all of a sudden... I mean, I always noticed that people that don't have children for whatever reason look much younger than people that do have children.
Well, they get younger, too.
Yeah.
They sleep through the night, you know?
That's what you said earlier.
It changed your whole perspective, didn't it?
You really did become actually an adult.
Right.
I miss motherhood.
I mean, the fact is, a mother...
I would hope a father would feel the same way, but of course it's not always the case.
A mother does without qualifications and feels so totally for the welfare of the kid.
And it does bring you outside of yourself into another, I guess.
I think it does.
I think being a parent, I think that's being a parent.
I think it's always waiting for the person to come home, always thinking about what can happen.
And it's just different than just having yourself to think about.
It's different.
It's funny.
When people ask me if they can borrow my books, you know, I don't want them out.
And I compare it with waiting for my daughter to come home for her estate, you know.
Will the book be returned?
And I would much rather buy somebody a copy of the book.
Yeah.
It's funny, yeah, I don't blame you.
It's funny because I think, you know, you have two daughters, and I think in some ways the thing, you know, as a woman, your concerns are different, you know, in terms of boys and girls.
But I think that's part of the reason, you know, that for this book I wanted to see what it was like to have, you know, two daughters.
You know, I wanted to experience, like, the familialness of it and the worries.
Did you think it was different?
I had it as a question why the two girls, but...
I wouldn't have expected that answer.
That's interesting.
It's also generational.
Can you tell me about why it had to be generational?
Well, I think, you know, no matter how you try to escape from your own kind of past, it always, I think it does kind of, I mean, it's possible to refine things and to change things, but I think, you know, your past is with you.
Yeah.
And that's a little bit about what it is.
Baggage, I guess.
I love the way you start every... Where do you get all these little magic, not magic things, but these superstitious things?
Well, a lot of them are kind of, what do you call it?
Some are made up.
Some are kind of old, what they used to call old wives tales.
Some are like traditional.
There's something where it says something, you know, women should wear blue, and that's where that, you know, when you wear something, borrow something blue.
I mean, they're kind of traditional
um kind of charms you know that people have done for ages and some of them, most of them are that sort of thing. What's good luck what's bad luck. You obviously never had any trouble this is what the 11th book? Yeah. 20 years, how many years is it? Yeah I think it is 20 years. I don't like this. Yeah more than 20 years
I think my first book was published when I was 22.
That's something.
Congratulations.
So it's a gift, isn't it?
It must be.
I think it's more of an obsession than a gift.
Do you know what I mean?
I feel like when people write, it's more that you can't stop writing, not that you can't think of what you write about.
But in terms of...
I feel like I'm blocked every time I start.
I kind of forget how it is to start a book, and then it just kind of happens.
Do you have an idea for a book when you start?
Yeah, I do, but sometimes I have the experience of looking from a sign cabinet and finding part of a book that I have no memory of writing, but I guess it didn't work out, or something.
That's happened to me several times, and I just don't remember writing it at all.
All your books are novels.
I mean, you haven't done stories.
I've done some stories.
You haven't published a volume of stories.
No.
So it's the novelist mentality.
I guess you're more of a marathon runner.
Yeah, I guess.
I'm gloping if you have to think of me.
No, that's true.
That's true.
Do you think in terms of narrative, I mean, constantly thinking about stories when we hear fragments of conversations?
Well, I tend not to use real life.
So I think consciously.
So I think I'm not thinking about stories as they're just kind of, I'm probably unconsciously collecting things as they become stories, mostly when I sit down to work.
I don't think of it a bit beforehand.
I mean, if this were a Saturday and I came in as a male adult, with a teenage daughter, would you start thinking, well, I wonder if he's divorced.
No.
That's great, huh?
Thanks.
First of all, I'm in the room.
Thank you.
Can I crush pepper?
I wouldn't, thank you.
I wouldn't.
Well, we're being good, aren't we?
All right.
Nice.
Thanks.
Again, that's some dessert.
Yeah.
I don't work out of reality in that way, consciously.
I mean, I think things surface, but...
So everything is not a natural story for you.
So coming up with stories is work, I guess.
Well, they just kind of come.
But I have to do it when I'm writing.
The process of writing is the thing that brings it out.
Do you start with the characters, the story?
Different every time.
It's really different every time.
Is it magical?
It's really magical.
Do you sit down?
Yeah, it is.
I mean, I think that, you know,
I think, you know, my life's reality affects it, but it's like, for instance, I was writing a book called Turtle Moon, and I was then, like, halfway done, and a friend of mine died, so I stopped.
He was killed in my car.
So I stopped for about three months and did things related to his death and whatever, and then I went back to writing, and there was an angel who appeared in my book.
It was somebody who's been
It killed him and crashed him.
And I didn't think at the time, oh, this was directly related to my friend having died or, you know.
But afterwards, of course, it came clear to me that this was not the character.
It wasn't the same person, but it came, you know, from that.
So I think it's, that's, I'm all worried.
Who knows what the wellsprings are.
Right, exactly.
Yeah.
Why don't you have some?
And I'll just check this out for you to respond to that.
Okay.
Yeah.
Well, it's not that I don't have a high degree, but they're mainly contemporary, you know, kind of male novels.
I just don't think they're very interesting at the moment.
And it's funny because I went to lunch with a friend, a man who's a writer.
and he was talking about all these books he's read recently.
They've left me all that many, and I've never heard of any of the men, and I've never heard of any of the books.
I just, you know, there's some male writers who I really like and feel, you know, I like Russell Banks a lot.
I like John Irving.
You know, there are certain writers that I respect, but when I'm reading for my own personal pleasure, and I'm reading a lot of novels, I tend to read women.
Do you read for pleasure?
Do you have time?
Yeah.
And you read your contemporaries, too.
I do.
That's unusual.
Is it?
Yeah, I find a lot of people... Do you find that you're approaching it like a carpenter?
I mean, are you looking at the sense of craft and what they're doing, or are you reading it as a reader?
I'm just reading it as a reader.
Good for you, because you're able to do that.
Well, I don't think of myself as an academic or an intellectual.
But you're a professional writer, so you are.
Yeah.
But also, you know, some of the people that I like are the people who are most different than myself, you know, as writers, you know, like I love Jane Smiley.
Oh, did you read the new book?
The new book?
I started, I haven't finished it.
I did an interview with her.
It's astonishing how she can go from that thousand acres.
And the piece I wrote, it's very interesting.
Again, it's a Shakespearean thing.
And then Greenlanders, you know, came prior to that.
Yeah, I love that.
And I said, you know, it is interesting that you, which it was an epic, but it was a play, a historical novel, basically.
So you went from history to tragedy to comedy, which is Shakespeare.
And she found that.
That is interesting.
And she said that a thousand acres and moo were basically conceived as, she conceived them both at the same time.
And I think that they're both there.
They're both Midwestern and they're agricultural.
I mean, I have to say, humor doesn't appeal to me.
Do you know what I mean?
Like, and black humor doesn't.
So even though I admire what she's doing, and I think she's always kind of stretching, I loved The Bad and Anchor.
I totally loved it.
But you certainly have a sense of humor that promotes your work.
You certainly do.
I've been reading a lot of Ellen Gilchrist lately.
Do you know her?
I have not read her work.
Oh, I don't think you'd like her.
Basically, with me, I have to read.
For work.
You know, to introduce things.
Exactly.
Going to New York for Pat Conroy.
Oh, that should be interesting.
That'll be fun.
This will be about the fourth time I've met Pat.
Did you see the big article in Vanity Carr?
I haven't.
I haven't even had a chance to read yet.
I got this Mary Carr's book, which is supposed to be wonderful.
The Liar's Club.
Have you heard it?
It's a...
It's a memoir, which the Times gave it.
I mean, I've rarely seen a rave of a book.
Really?
It's a memoir?
It's a memoir.
West Texas.
It's called Liar's Club.
The Liar's Club.
I'll know more about it, you know.
I'll read it this weekend.
And then Richard Ford next Friday.
So that's, you know, a pretty good lineup.
Yeah, look at that.
I write it very interesting that you don't really like to read from your work.
Yeah, no, I don't.
I wonder why that is.
Well, I started doing it last year.
And I tell you the truth, I don't like to go to readings either.
I don't understand the full phenomenon.
You know, when I started out, people didn't do this the way that they're doing it now.
And I have always hated to be read to.
I think that reading is a really personal experience, you and the book.
And as a child, I hated to be read to.
I mean, my kids like to be read to.
I understand a lot of people must like to be read to.
But I can't stand it.
And so, I mean, you know, I'll do readings.
I'm going to do one of my kids read.
And it's okay.
But I kind of don't understand the whole thing.
Is it something philosophical?
Well, I think when you read, it becomes a performance piece.
It becomes like a theater thing.
Because that's what they've done with poetry now.
The poets have all of a sudden had a renaissance.
Right, right.
Well, somehow poetry seems more natural.
With poetry, it seems... Thanks.
It seems that that's the whole thing about reading a book or reading a novel is such a personal experience, and it's you, your imagination, and the book.
And if you have somebody reading it and, like,
reading the dialogue with certain inflection and, you know, you're not getting a pure version of what it should be.
I don't know.
Are you ever tempted to revise as you read?
I mean, is the finished work for you a finished work?
I think it is finished, yeah.
I've known so many poets or writers.
John Barth, for instance, looks like he's reading from something else.
He'll change it on the spot.
He'll see something.
Well, maybe that's it.
Maybe I don't want to have to experience that and think, oh, God, I should have done this.
I should have written it this way.
I should have done this.
The book's over.
Do you like reading your books?
Do you read your books?
No, I don't.
Done.
Next case, right?
Do you see your 11 books as a body of work?
Is it a corpus?
Do you think the shelf is complete?
It'll be done.
Well, I mean, will there be a...
a unique to it.
You don't look at it that way.
I don't look at it that way, although I do believe that that's true for every writer's work.
I mean, I think when you take a writer's work and you look at it all, you see, you know, the obsessions, the themes, you know, you see, you know, you see work as, you know, complete work.
Are you mindfully minding your obsessions?
No, I'm not mindfully doing anything.
That's a good quote, by the way.
I take the terms of quotes for the
How do these interviews at the bookstores with the readers, with the non-professional interviews work out?
Do they ask good questions?
Well, you know, I've never done it before last year.
Last year was the first time I'd ever done anything, and it was a pleasant surprise because my readers just seemed like, I felt like, I felt that they were the people I'd choose to spend time with.
Do you know what I mean?
They seemed so familiar to me.
They seemed like, oh...
These are, you know, my contemporaries.
They seem very familiar to me.
It was really a nice experience to do that.
I was really surprised because I feel like I'm usually so isolated, I don't think, in terms of having readers.
You don't really?
No.
Do you get letters?
You don't have a... I get letters, but I only last year's heard an answer on them.
I usually, you know, I just didn't respond because it just seemed, I didn't have time.
You know, it just seemed too, it diffuses things, you know.
You might just get a dialogue.
Dialogue is going with you.
I don't have time, you know.
I barely have time to comb my hair, you know.
I did a piece I did this week.
Was it Mary Wesley?
Have you heard of her?
No.
82-year-old.
Wonderful.
Finally, she's a phenomenon in England.
I'd never heard of her read it, but she's done 11 books, nine books in 11 years.
She started publishing at the age of 70.
Really?
And they compare her with whoever they are.
It was a big piece in her.
It was a form of barrenness.
Oh, that's interesting.
But who said that this...
This marriage to this Lord, or whatever he was, realized it was a disaster halfway through the ceremony, left to marry the half-German, this was during, before World War II, and so therefore was disinherited, and when this guy died, she was penniless, and started writing these books, which are wonderful.
I had a good review on the book, a good review on the times, but a very interesting interview.
What am I driving into here?
I don't know.
Eleven books in nine years, that's a lot.
Oh, she gets letters.
She gets letters from her collectors and her readers.
And she has this pen pal creation.
Wow.
I don't know how she does it.
Maybe she doesn't sleep.
She also says writing is an obsession.
She used to tell the children, even before she was published, she used to write therapy.
You'd say, mommy has the flu.
She goes, right.
Now, you don't do that, right?
No, I don't.
It's interesting that you had a grandmother who wrote Yiddish, is that right?
A grandfather.
I have in my book.
Have you ever heard of Aaron Lansky?
He founded the National Yiddish Book Center.
Totally obsessed.
And his goal in life is to save the Yiddish language by gathering as many books as he can.
He's got a million of them.
Wow.
And he got him a carpentry scholarship.
I read about this since I was a boy.
I don't know.
He's basically responsible now for Yiddish being taught in 150 colleges all over the world.
He rescues books.
I love them.
To keep that language alive.
Well, not only to keep it alive, he was dying.
You know, you can't read it, I'll bet.
So if you inherited 25 books in Nittich, what would you do with them?
Yeah.
He would go and get them.
Yeah, that's really great.
It's a cute story.
One of my chapters.
That's good.
I've read something about your feelings for fiction as fiction is really the expression of truth.
I think so.
I think it's very awesome, you know.
that non-fiction is giving you the fact that it's not giving you the truth sometimes.
No, but it seems like, you know, fiction, when it's at its best, it gives you a deeper kind of truth, the deepest kind of truth.
That's the same.
By the way, the novel is for me the most difficult... It is difficult because you don't have a subject, you know?
Well, and it's my job to read the book.
It would offend me if I were a novelist to have somebody ask me what I was writing about.
That's my job.
I should be able to do that.
So I'm really not looking for some other stuff.
Yeah.
I think we have some stuff, right?
Have we done okay?
I think so.
Are you writing fantasies in your mind when you do?
Well, I don't know what the definition is.
I think writing fiction is writing a fantasy.
You can call it realistic fiction or whatever, but it's still a fantasy.
I don't know how I feel about those kinds of definitions.
I'm not really sure how they apply.
Working on something?
Do you believe in spells?
I like the section superstition.
premonition, limitation.
Yeah.
Well, I believe that if you, you know, I believe that there's the, you know, in the power of people to think themselves into, you know, whatever they choose to believe in.
You know, I mean, I believe in that.
I believe in, you know, if you feel that someone could have gone, you know, you could easily become, you know, affected by it.
I don't know what I believe in.
You know, I don't, I'm not sure what I believe in.
I mean, I'm willing to
You must be blessed.
I hate to use that word, but as a literary writer you are respected.
I feel like when I start publishing, publishing is really different in that it's constricted and that it's really changed and that it's much different for people who have started publishing for 20 years.
This is my family.
I'm going to leave one there alone.
Describe my book before you leave.
They might not be leaving.
Yeah, I'd like to.
I think it really has changed.
I mean, people I know are young writers now.
I think it's much you're either... You're either...
Commercially, you're literized.
But it's Nick, right?
I mean, don't you think of yourself as Nick?
Could you date it, please?
Yep.
Today's my 20th anniversary date.
Ooh.
And that's something.
Good.
And she's in the life's other vineyard.
Are you going out there?
Well, yeah.
This is the place to do it, on the title page, is that right?
That's just some book dealer telling me that's the only place where, if you ever wanted to be worth anything, if it's any place else, it's not.
Is that right?
I'm having these wonderful... When Darcy listens to books, have her sign it on there.
She does.
My collection, by the way, is...